MINIMUM PLAN SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS  
FOR NEW SINGLE -FAMILY HOUSE (S) AND 
ADDITION (S) TO EXISTING HOUSE PROJECTS
Applicants must provide complete architectural/structural plans for all residential construction projects.  
Plans must be drawn to scale and be of sufficient quality to explain the proposed construction clearly and 
completely.
DESIGN CRITERIA
• Cover Page: Must include Scope of Work, Drawing Index, Code Analysis, Current IBC/IRC/IECC Codes and 
Prince George’s County Building Amendments, Subtitle 4, and Building Data (area of new house or addition).
• Floor Live Load = 40 psf, except in sleeping rooms where the Live Load = 30 psf.
• Roof Live Load = 30 psf, with additional load for roof areas subjected to drifting. Ground Snow Load = 35 psf.
• Basic Wind Speed = 115 mph, 3-second gusts; Seismic Design Category B.
• Frost/Footing Depth = 30-inches.
REQUIRED DRAWINGS 
1. Foundation Plan (Min. Scale ¼  = 1 -0 ): Must show all elements of the foundation with solid lines and 
the footings with dashed lines; include complete dimensioning for the exterior walls and clearly dimension the 
locations and sizes of all interior bearing walls and footings.
2. Floor Plans (Min. Scale ¼  = 1-0 ): Include separate drawings for each floor. Show all architectural/structural 
elements (rooms, doors, windows, stairs, railings, fixtures, etc.) Proposed uses of spaces (room names) and 
dimensions locating all elements, stairway widths, and landing sizes must be included.
3. Building Cross Section(s) (Min. Scale ¼  = 1 -0 ): The number of section drawings shall be as necessary 
to explain the structural system completely. Must be a comprehensive drawing showing the entire building 
and/or proposed construction. Vertical dimensions (floor-to-floor, construction heights) must be shown.
4. Framing Plans (Min. Scale ¼  = 1-0 ): Include separate drawings for each floor and roof showing all framing 
members and respective points of bearing. Materials, series, sizes and spacing of all structural members must 
be specified (floor joists, rafters, ridges, valleys, hips, ceiling joists, collar ties, bearing walls, beams, posts, 
headers). Accurately dimension the locations of all points of bearing.
5. Elevations (Min. Scale ¼  = 1-0 ): Exterior views of each facade (front, rear & sides) showing the construction 
in its finished condition. Indicate all door and window sizes and specify all finish building materials. For building 
additions, the existing and proposed elevations on all sides of the building must be part of the permit set.
6. Typical Wall Sections (Min. Scale ¾  = 1 -0 ): Demonstrate accurate detail of the construction drawn from 
the footing up to and including the roof and/or top of the proposed construction, as applicable. Specify all 
building materials, sizes and spacing.
7. Details (Min. Scale ¾  = 1 -0 ): As required to show special conditions.
8. Structural Lateral Bracing Drawings: Show method(s), size(s) of bracing on each of the floor plans. The 
bracing plan must be on a separate sheet.
9. ePLAN Submittals: Each PDF sheet must be named as “Sheet # — Sheet Title” before uploading to the 
system. (Example: A101 — First Floor Plan. S101 — Foundation Plan.) The permit set must be uploaded in 
the appropriate folders. (Example: Architectural drawings are uploaded in the “Architectural” folder; Structural 
drawings are uploaded in the “Structural” folder, etc.)
Page 1 of 1
Prince George’s County
Department of Permitting, Inspections 
and Enforcement
BUILDING PLAN REVIEW DIVISION  
9400 Peppercorn Place, Suite 213
Largo, Maryland  20774
(301) 636–2070
P.G.C. DPIE Form #E003 (Rev. 1/24)