Warning: Cannot polyfill `DOMMatrix`, rendering may be broken.
Warning: Cannot polyfill `Path2D`, rendering may be broken.
===== PAGE 1 =====
Part D
Guidelines for
Tree Canopy Coverage
===== PAGE 2 =====
D-2
•
Environmental Technical Manual
Prince George’s County Planning Department
1.0
INTRODUCTION
The Woodland and Wildlife Habitat Conservation Ordinance (WCO) provides for the protection and enhancement
of existing woodlands and provides for the planting of tree and forest cover. However, there are sites that are
exempt from meeting these requirements, and there are sites where it is not possible to meet the requirements
on-site. These sites could benefit greatly from the strategic planting of trees to provide meaningful areas of tree
canopy coverage as part of the overall design.
The planting of trees provides many benefits to communities. Trees reduce overall temperatures, especially where
they are planted to shade hard surfaces, such as parking lots, roofs, and siding. Studies have shown that the net
cooling effect of a young, healthy tree is equivalent to 10 room-size air conditioners operating 20 hours a day. They
take in a gas that at high concentrations can be lethal to humans (carbon dioxide) and release oxygen. One acre
of trees removes up to 2.6 tons of carbon dioxide per year. Preserving trees and providing tree canopies not only
results in cleaner air but also in increased property values and reduced energy costs.
Tree canopies provide many other benefits too, the most important of which are intercepting rainwater so it can
be absorbed more slowly and absorbing and transpiring excess rainwater. Studies have shown that tree canopies
in urban settings provide millions of dollars worth of stormwater management benefits. The preservation and
enhancement of tree canopy coverage is one of the tools being emphasized for the restoration of the Chesapeake Bay.
In December 2003, the Chesapeake Executive Council signed a Riparian Forest Buffer Directive that included setting
goals for tree canopies in urban areas in order to protect the Chesapeake Bay from the pollutants in urban runoff.
In order to ensure sustainable and livable communities for future generations, the 2005 General Plan set forest and
tree cover goals for 2025 as follows:
Developed Tier:
26 percent (maintains the 2000 coverage percentage)
Developing Tier:
38 percent (a reduction from the 2000 figure of 41 percent)
Rural Tier:
60 percent (an increase from the 2000 figure of 59 percent)
Countywide
44 percent (a slight decrease from the 2000 figure of 45 percent)
In order to reach these goals, the Countywide Green Infrastructure Plan contains recommendations regarding
needed changes to the associated ordinances. The addition of a tree canopy coverage requirement was not
explored at that time, but it is an appropriate strategy to assist in reaching the 2025 tree and forest canopy
coverage goals of the general plan.
For most development projects, the tree canopy coverage requirement will not result in additional tree planting
because it will be met using the areas provided for woodland conservation. The types of projects that will
benefit the most from this requirement are the sites that need the tree canopy the most: dense development and
redevelopment projects where strategic tree planting can turn uninhabitable outdoor spaces into urban oases for
relaxation and protection from the sun.
===== PAGE 3 =====
Part D: Guidelines for Tree Canopy Coverage
•
D-3
2.0
Overview of Tree Canopy Coverage
Tree canopy is defined in Subtitle 25 as follows:
“Tree canopy: The land area under the dripline of an existing tree or group of trees or the
amount of credit provided for planting trees of a certain species and certain size at time
of planting in conformance with the worksheet provided in ‘The Technical Manual.’”
Tree canopy coverage is defined as:
“Tree canopy coverage: The combined area measured in square feet of the tree canopies
of existing trees and trees planted in conformance with this Division and “The Technical
Manual.” Tree canopy coverage requirements are measured using a percentage of the
gross tract area.”
To visualize tree canopy coverage, imagine the amount of shade a tree will cast at noon on a sunny day when
viewed from above. The shadow of the tree would then be measured in square footage to determine how much
tree canopy is provided by that tree.
Figure D-1.
Calculating Tree Canopy Area for Single Tree
To meet the requirements for tree canopy coverage, the existing and proposed amounts of tree canopy coverage
must be measured.
To be eligible to meet the tree canopy coverage requirements, planting areas must be designed to provide the
maximum allowable rooting zone.
Trees should be planted in appropriate locations based on each species’ cultural tolerances to be eligible to meet
the tree canopy coverage requirements. For example, a dogwood planted in a parking lot island in full sun would
not be eligible to meet the requirements because dogwoods prefer partial to full shade in order to thrive. In
another example, if an evergreen tree, such as a white pine, is proposed to be planted in a narrow space between
a fence and a parking lot curb, it could not be given credit because, due to its low branching and wide form, it will
outgrow the available area quickly.
===== PAGE 4 =====
D-4
•
Environmental Technical Manual
Prince George’s County Planning Department
3.0
Applicability of the Tree Canopy
Requirements
The tree canopy requirements contained in the WCO apply to all types of applications that require a tree
conservation plan or letter of exemption; in other words, all applications requiring a grading permit.
Existing woodlands and landscape and street trees may be counted toward meeting the tree canopy coverage
requirement. While the woodland conservation requirements may be met on-site or off-site, the tree canopy
coverage requirement must be met on-site, unless a variance has been approved to either allow a reduction in
the requirement or to allow the meeting of the requirement through some other method. All woodlands and
landscape trees may be counted toward meeting the tree canopy coverage requirements even if they are used to
meet the requirements of the WCO or the Landscape Manual.
If the only application to be submitted is a grading permit, then the tree canopy coverage notes must be placed
on the grading plan. Refer to the scenarios in Appendix D for more information regarding how each type of
application is to be handled.
Table D-1.
Tree Canopy Requirements by Zone
Zone
Minimum Tree Canopy
Coverage*
R-O-S, O-S, R-A
Exempt
R-E, R-L, V-L
20%
R-S, R-R, R-80, R-55, R-35, R-20, R-T, R-30, R-30C, R-18, R-18C, R-10, R-10A, R-H, R-U, R-M,
R-M-H, V-M
15%
C-A, C-O, C-S-C, C-1, C-C, C-G, C-2, C-W, C-M, C-H, C-R-C, I-1, I-2, I-3, I-4, E-I-A, L-A-C, M-X-C,
M-U-I, M-U-TC, M-X-T, M-A-C, U-L-I
10%
*Percentage of gross tract area
4.0
Tree Canopy Coverage Calculation
Methodology
4.1
STEP 1: CALCULATING THE AMOUNT REQUIRED
To calculate the requirement for a site, the gross tract area is multiplied by the percentage required based on the
zone as shown in Table D-1. For a 2.55-acre site in the R-R Zone, the requirement would be calculated as follows:
2.55-acre site (gross tract area) x 15% = 0.38 acres or 16,662 square feet of tree canopy coverage required
===== PAGE 5 =====
Part D: Guidelines for Tree Canopy Coverage
•
D-5
4.2
STEP 2: MEASURING THE WOODLANDS AND TREE COVER TO
BE PRESERVED
The proper method for calculating the amount of tree coverage provided depends on the types of vegetation to
be used to meet the requirement. Any of the following methods can be used alone or in combination to meet the
requirement for a particular site.
Woodland conservation:
If the site is providing sufficient woodland conservation on-site to also meet the tree
canopy coverage requirement, the following notation shall be placed below the woodland conservation worksheet
on the tree conservation plan:
Note: The tree canopy coverage requirement on this site has been met using woodland conservation on-site as
follows:
Tree canopy coverage required: 0.38 acres or 16,553 square feet (2.55 acres x 15%)
Total tree canopy coverage provided using woodland conservation: 0.91 acres (the 0.91-acre figure will be
shown on the “Total Woodland Conservation Provided” line on the woodland conservation worksheet).
Existing wooded areas or large trees:
For existing wooded areas or trees larger than 6 inches in diameter
measured 12 inches above the ground, the existing tree canopy coverage is used (see Figure D-2). For example,
a 10-inch diameter tree might provide an area of canopy coverage that is 400 square feet in area, based on aerial
photo observations or ground measurements. Tree canopies for existing woodlands and trees are measured from
the edges of the outermost branches.
In this case, the plan must be marked to note which woodland areas or large trees are being preserved to
be counted toward meeting the requirements, and a tree canopy coverage worksheet must be added. If the
information cannot be displayed legibly on the tree conservation plan, then a separate sheet illustrating how the
tree canopy coverage requirements are being met must be added. The tree canopy coverage worksheet should be
placed on this separate sheet if one is provided.
Areas proposed for afforestation/reforestation:
These areas are measured based on their square footage. The
amount credited toward meeting the requirement is the same as the area afforested or reforested. In this case,
the plan must be marked to note which afforestation/reforestation areas are being planted to be counted toward
meeting the requirements. If this is the sole method being used, a note on the plan is sufficient. If landscape trees
are used in combination, then a tree canopy coverage worksheet must be included on the associated plan.
Landscape trees:
Trees smaller than 6 inches in diameter, 12 inches above the ground, are measured using
their potential future canopy coverage in ten years, according to the chart shown in the worksheet provided in
Appendix D
.
===== PAGE 6 =====
D-6
•
Environmental Technical Manual
Prince George’s County Planning Department
Figure D-2.
Calculating Tree Canopy Area for Group of Trees
4.3
STEP 3: CALCULATING THE AMOUNT PROVIDED
As noted above, if existing woodlands are used exclusively. Then, all that is needed on the plans is a note under the
woodland conservation worksheet.
If woodlands are used and proposed landscape trees are used to meet the tree canopy coverage requirement, then
a tree canopy worksheet must be provided on the associated plan.
If proposed landscape trees are used exclusively to meet the tree canopy coverage requirement and there is no
TCP2 to show the calculations, then a tree canopy worksheet must be provided on the associated plan.
When calculating the amount provided, the acreages of the woodlands and landscape trees used to meet the
requirement are added, and the amount provided must at least equal the amount required.
